We met once before, well actually several times before, but we did a formal interview I think in Boston.
I don't remember how many years or so it was.
Longer than you try to think.
Time passes.
And I think we sat at the same table at lunch at the ABA this year.
Oh really?
In any case, I'm pleased to have a... The ABA, the last ABA, not the one you just had.
Was it Miami, perhaps?
Yeah, Miami Beach, I was there.
Okay, yeah, that's where these things do become a blur after a while.
An interesting book that you have here, and I wonder if you could tell me how you see this fitting into the corpus, so to speak.
Well, the history behind this book goes back to the fact that in Canada I've been involved in small publishing, small literary publishing through the years.
And if you look on where it says Acknowledgements, you'll probably see that these appeared in two books from Coates has Pratt originally.
And then they got published in England, and they got...
translated into such languages as German and Swedish and French.
And they were not, because they're not classifiable, you know, you can't say it's a novel, it's a short story, or it's poetry.
American publishers just didn't know what to do.
So finally, Nan Tlaive decided, why don't we take some from each and put them all together
in one book so that is what they did but they are pieces that I write from time to time and they usually appear first in magazines and I read them at readings they're perfect for reading because they're very self-contained and they've been very popular with creative writing teachers who take them into the classrooms
as an example to the students of something they can do that's short enough for them to manage when they're just beginning.
Do you see each one as complete pieces, despite the... Yes, they're complete pieces.
I know it's interesting, you should say, that I've done these little reviews for the New York Times over the years, and they tell you 200 words.
You know, if you do 210, we've got to cut 10 words out of the thing.
And it's amazing...
You know, how you really try and be fair and just to a book in 200 words, how hard that is.
It's harder than that in a longer form.
And your answer anticipated another question.
I felt that these were almost pieces that Margaret Atwood would write if she were like Ellen Goodman, you know, writing a column for her.
Oh, no.
No, I don't think so.
They're far too condensed linguistically for that.
But in terms of they are brief and concise, and they could almost be published in a newspaper, so to speak.
I don't think so.
I don't think newspaper readers would know what to make of them a lot of the time.
I think they're a bit too literary for that, apparently, is such a word.
Do you feel that the reader of these pieces has to be familiar with Margaret Atwood?
No.
I think the reader of the pieces, however, has to be familiar with, for instance, Gertrude talks back.
You'd have to be familiar with Hamlet.
Well, you know, I have that here in my notes, and I thought...
In its own way, it does give a very accurate summary of the play.
Well, there's quite a few things thrown in.
Yeah, but I mean in terms of the factual nature of the play is correct.
Yeah.
The references are correct.
Anyway, you never know because the little red hen, you would think everybody knows that.
Yeah.
But in fact, it was translated into German, and I read it out of an assemblage of German academics.
In German or in English?
In German.
Oh, really?
Yes.
How did it translate?
Well, it translated very well, and it was very funny.
But they had never heard of The Little Red Hemp.
It's not a known German story.
So in fact, I found myself having to explain what that story was in the originals.
And now there's all these German academics analyzing the little red hand.
Now, you don't consider this serious work, do you?
Well, some of it is serious.
Well, of course it's serious work.
What do you mean by now?
Well, I guess I meant by asking the question to get a response.
Well, some of them are funny, but if you turn towards the back, you will find pieces like death scenes.
Mm-hmm.
or good bones of self or third-handed.
Now, do you write these?
That's why I would say these are not newspaper pieces.
Do you write these more or less as a diversion from the larger work?
No, I write them the same way I write poems.
They're a recognized European form.
What is the descriptive term then?
Well, the French would probably call them prose poems.
Kafka might call some of them parables.
Huh.
And is that how they're... Kafka wrote in short forms a lot, as you know.
And the Surrealists were quite keen on short prose forms.
And is this how they are described in Europe?
Well, the Europeans don't seem to have a trouble with the concepts.
Huh.
I realize it's a little early, but how have your American and Canadian readers been responding to this?
Well, the Canadian readers had first crack at it, and they responded in large numbers.
Really?
And the American readers, of course, have just come out here.
So it's a little bit early to tell, but you see, you don't write these things...
in order to have, uh, Bridges of Madison County bestsellers.
No?
No.
When I put them into books originally, it was part of the small publishing tie-in, uh, because I knew it would make enough money for the small publisher to keep them going for another year.
Uh-huh.
Which it did.
Uh, I, I think the illustrations are quite nice, too.
They, uh, um,
These are yours?
Yes.
Were these done well after the pieces were written?
Oh, I draw a lot.
And I have done another... I've done a couple of other books, actually, with pictures, and one of them dates back as far as 1970.
It's a poetry book called The Journals of Susanna Moody.
So, again, it's not...
completely out of the blue sort of thing for me to do.
You have demonstrated in the body of your work an interest, a curiosity, a fascination, even in classical and popular mythologies.
And I wonder if this more or less follows along with that interest of yours.
Absolutely.
You mean by classical and popular, you mean Greek, biblical and... All of the above.
Yeah, absolutely.
Even folk tales, even, and fairy tales.
Building blocks of story, as it were.
I guess we spoke earlier, we mentioned earlier, about how this fits into the body of your work.
I think we touched on that briefly.
How do you see it, actually, in a larger sense?
Well, you see, I'm not an academic doing a thesis on myself.
Thank heavens.
But for future academics who undoubtedly will be doing it.
I'm not going to help them out.
You are or you are not.
I'm not going to tell them.
I'm going to have to do that.
Actually, you know, somebody's already working on this very question.
Really.
I did an interview with Doris Lessing a few weeks ago when she was in New York, and one of the reasons she wrote this memoir, she said, is because she learned that there were five biographers in the works.
So she said, well, let's try and get it right in any case.
Well, I've already had a couple of things come out that are quite wrong, but... What usually do they get wrong?
I'm talking about the work.
They get the facts wrong.
I don't care about opinions.
Everybody's entitled to their own, but when they have you...
Born in a different year than the year you were born in, you know something is wrong.
Yeah, but you mean the opinions of the work, they matter to you certainly.
But it's not something you go around correcting.
You can't correct somebody else's opinion.
But they do get the facts wrong.
Well, are the facts in The Feminist Companion to Literature in English correct?
Because that's my reference.
That's the Yale book, which I have over here.
Uh-oh.
Well, I guess I've got to pick it up.
It's pretty good, actually.
It's a terrific book.
Let's see who did that one.
Virginia Blaine, Isabella Quindy.
But it's an excellent book.
I think the trouble is that once something gets written down, everybody thinks it's true, and then they draw on it.
What's the famous quote?
History repeats itself, but historians repeat one another.
Yeah, something like that.
Something like that.
I think it's a Shaw quote.
Are you working on a novel now?
I am wrestling with a novel.
Wrestling.
Wrestling with a novel.
What does wrestling mean?
Waking up at four in the morning and thinking.
So have you started, do you throw material away at all?
Oh, do I throw, yes.
You don't think in terms of those future scholars who might love to see?
Do I put it in a drawer?
Yeah.
Sometimes I throw it out.
Sometimes I put it in a drawer.
I had an academic, speaking of academics, say to me, are you using a computer now?
And I said, yes.
He said, yes.
I suppose that makes it easier for you to hide things.
And I said, what do you mean hide things?
He said, well, when you change something, there's no record of it.
That's right.
It's not hiding things.
It's writing.
Well, you know, you get out of the University of Texas and you see all these variant drafts after variant drafts, and I suppose they do have their place.
But there are writers who would just as soon...
see the finished work go out there and have that speak.
Well, that's what should be speaking.
You agree with that?
That's what should be speaking.
On the other hand, that doesn't mean that I don't give my manuscripts to the University of Toronto, because I do.
I consider it a job creation program.
For scholars?
Yes, absolutely.
So I would imagine there is an Atwood industry.
Well, there's an Atwood newsletter.
There's an Atwood Association, and it has a newsletter.
Uh-huh.
Are these for fans, or are these for scholars?
No, these are for scholars, and it's an American one.
It must be... You can write it right away and join it, if you wish.
Um, why not?
Where is it headquarters?
I'll follow up on that.
Well, I guess you would find it through the MLA.
Sure.
Well, really, that is...
How do you respond to this?
With wry amusement?
Do you know Max Beerbohm at all?
I know his work, of course, yeah.
He has a cartoon called The Browning Society, which shows these rather dejected-looking people sitting around the discussing Robert Browning and looking terribly earnest.
So I always think of... You can't get too... Usually these things happen to people who are dead.
Generally speaking, of course.
There's a delightful essay that Robert Benchley wrote back in the 30s, which he called, Why Does Nobody Collect Me?
Yes, well, they do now.
They do now.
He was so upset.
I mean, he saw a Hemingway book commanding such and such a price.
He said, nobody's interested in my spare copy of such and such a book, even the one that's a cute story.
Uh...
I guess, where you mentioned that there is this repository in Toronto for your work, and of course there's a newsletter, do you feel... None of this really has anything to do with me, does it?
It doesn't, does it?
I guess that's anticipating a question, isn't it?
The question being, does any of this have anything to do with you?
That would have been the question.
Could you answer it with more than a mono, with a single question?
No, you can't get too hooked on your own, quote, career image.
But you kind of have a, I won't use the word unique, but certainly being...
I think everyone would agree, most knowledgeable readers would agree that you are your country's most prominent writer.
And you do speak for Canadian literature, I guess.
So you do, I guess that does come with some responsibilities, doesn't it?
Or does it not?
Even that's questionable.
I don't like to be, I mean, I am not a government employee.
But it could be suggested that you're certainly a national, I don't want to embarrass you now, but a national treasurer, as the Japanese might say.
There are others.
Robertson Davies, of course, is a major, major writer from, as opposed to a major writer.
So you wouldn't feel any special comment on that at all?
Well, you know, I talk about Canadian literature from time to time.
In fact, I have a book of,
a book coming out, which was four lectures that I did at Oxford University Press, at Oxford University, and it will be coming out with Oxford University Press, and it's about Canadian literature, in fact, the literature of the North, and it's called Strange Things, a quote from the Robert Service poem, Strange things are done in the midnight sun, etc.
So I do that from time to time, but it's partly a matter of practicality.
What do I have to tell English people about English literature?
Nothing.
So if I'm going to talk to them at all about anything, it has to be about Canadian literature, which they are guaranteed not to know very much about.
Although Oxford did put out a nice companion to Canadian literature a couple of years ago.
That was put out in Canada, wasn't it?
Yeah, but it was distributed here.
This is Oxford in England that we're talking about.
Right.
uh but it's an i have it it's very you know very useful book yes and and of course we do the oxford uh book of canadian verse in english and we do the oxford book of canadian short stories in english but those are published by oxford press in canada is is american literature of i notice when i see these tours these tour
lists of where the American authors are going.
Inevitably, if it's even a semi-important book, Toronto will always be on the list.
Is American literature... How is it greeted in Canada, would you say?
Well, in any Canadian bookstore that you walk into, you'll see a huge number of American books.
And...
I would say we can get anything of yours.
You can't necessarily get anything of ours.
Which is really the way it is, unfortunately, with so many other national literatures that American books... It's the small, big thing as well.
Danes have the same thing.
They're so delighted that Smilla's Sense of Snow has done so well because now foreign publishers are at least considering
They're at least reading to consider Scandinavian writers.
Ordinarily, they just don't get a look in.
He's got another book out.
I've had a chance to see it.
I asked that question selfishly.
Earlier this year, I started syndicating myself, and I've got myself in 22 newspapers now.
And what I've targeted basically are university towns like Eugene, Oregon, and I'm in Madison, Wisconsin, and Knoxville, and Gainesville, and Austin, and Toledo, et cetera, and Columbus.
And I thought, you know, my wife and I have just done this this year.
We've got 22 papers.
We were thinking very seriously of trying some Canadian papers to see if they're interested in these interviews that I do, you know.
Well, it wouldn't be out of the question.
On the other hand, I have to say the Canadian papers...
their book coverage has gone down.
Well, you see, that's the kind of thing I'm exploiting.
That's happened everywhere.
On the other hand, there are sort of specialty things that happen.
For instance, some of the book chains have their own newsletters that they put out, and there are things like BC Book World.
So there are books.
If the newspapers didn't work, the book publications...
of that kind might be another possibility.
See, what I've been doing is going for cities where they aren't about to get a Margaret Atwood come into town or a Joe Heller or a John Irving or Doris Lessing, Nadine Gordimer.
These are the authors I do week after week.
And even if they have a full-time book editor, they've found it useful to...
I mean, it's really caught on pretty well.
Toronto is probably not a good bet.
No, because they're too big.
Yeah, they're covered.
But I'm thinking of places like in British Columbia, perhaps.
Quickly, so what would you name, what would you think are some of the better, you don't mind by taking your brains here for about two minutes, just on some of the newspapers, say, outside of Toronto or the areas where there might be strong book periods?
Well, what you have to do is look at who owns them.
See if they're part of the Thompson chain.
That's bad.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's the case down here as well, unfortunately.
Or whether they aren't.
I haven't been able to get into a single Thompson paper.
I've gotten into New York Times papers, L.A.
Times papers.
I've gotten into... Well, Thompson has a reputation for being extremely stingy.
But for a freelancer who offers good stuff at a reasonable rate, you know, it could almost work to your advantage, too.
But anyway, I won't bother you with this stuff.
Mr. Thompson over the head, get him to change his... Yeah.
I'd like it if you could do that.
But Thompson's newspapers as a rule are pretty... But if it's not Thompson, then it'll be somebody else.
For instance, who owns the Montreal Gazette?
Yeah, I've got the E&P.
That's our next badge.
We're going to try some Canadian papers.
I want to let you go, Ms.
Atwood.
I know you have another interview coming up in about three minutes.
Oh, do I?
They told me you had to be off the phone by 11.45.
So I think we've got plenty here to do a nice little piece and look forward.
For heaven's sake, for heaven's sake, they're not newspaper columns.
No, I know that.
I know they're not.
I was trying to spark a response, and I'm afraid I was too successful.
Sometimes you can go a little too far, I'm afraid.
Don't worry, I promise you.
The reason I'm able to get into these good university towns is I think that I do have a sensitivity for what I'm doing, and I do read the books.
Guess what?
You know, that helps, too.
I just did an interview with the Germans.
person, the person of Germanic persuasion, who said, why are you so ironic about academics?
And I said, I didn't think I was any more ironic about academics than about anybody else.
But the academics gave a lot of scope because the gap between what they're teaching and daily life is so large.
On the one hand, you have philosophy and Shakespeare, and on the other hand, you have the staff meeting and power politics and the university, and who didn't wash their coffee cup?
Hmm.
Have you had a chance to read Harold Bloom's book, The Western Campaign?
Not yet.
What's it like?
It's, you know, it's a very, I like it.
I mean, you have to take into account he's a crusty old guy, you know.
But I had a very nice interview with him.
Oh, it's brilliant.
Yeah, it is.
I mean, when you, I think the central 20s, when he's writing about his writers and he's leaving aside the politics, which, you know, which you get in the first and concluding chapter,
Not to say I agree or disagree with him, but when he's writing about, as a critic, the man is brilliant, really.
He really has read the stuff and absorbed it.
Well, I'm glad that he has because that's his job.
Yeah, but I mean, a lot of us, so many people, well, I won't make a comment you can read, but...
But not the way he was.
Yeah.
I'll let you go.
Okay.
Good luck.
Thank you, and you too.
I might try, for instance, Prince George.
Oh, that's a good one.
Actually, it's not.
You were being naughty to me, so I was being naughty.
It's not, huh?
Okay.
Have nice holidays.
You too.
Bye-bye.